- Let's welcome Arushi, everybody.
- Thanks, everyone.
I feel like I can't see over my computer.
Yeah, my name is Arushi, and I'm a
founder and CEO of Habitat, and today I'm gonna
be talking about why we're building Habitat.
Is everything okay?
Okay, cool.
I believe that App Protocol gives us a chance to fundamentally reim
agine what connecting with each other online means, and through that
process, rewilding the internet.
So, I'm gonna try to get this right.
Okay.
It's a loose agenda.
In this talk, I start with some questions, talk about
my dreams for the web, and use some quotes from writers
I appreciate to guide my thinking.
Okay, cool.
So, if you go to approto.
com, this is what the website looks like.
The first time I read this, I kind of had the
question, what actually is the social internet?
The term, the social internet, came around before my time
, and even though I've heard it many times, I
never reflected deeply on what it meant, or what it referred
to.
So, this is what the internet does, right
?
It connects two computers together.
So, my question was, how can the internet not be
inherently social?
Why is the social internet separate from the internet itself?
Of course, this is not exactly how the internet works.
It connects in order for two computers to share data with each
other.
Typically, they connect to a shared server.
Which could be across the ocean, and that is how you
get a platform.
Boo.
Sorry about this.
So, as I started to read more about this time before
myself, when the internet transitioned from unsocial to social,
what I realized is that when people use the term the social
internet, what they actually mean is the platform internet.
When the web transitioned from web 1.
0 to web 2.
0, it allowed users to publish pieces of data, including
social data, and platforms were the primary way to do so
.
And to be fair, several of the articles I read were
by Kyle Chayka.
So, maybe it is Kyle pushing this agenda.
But I think, generally speaking, what people imagine when you
use the term the social internet is platforms like earlier MySpace
AOL in the first era, and now we have like
X, Facebook, Instagram, even Blue Sky and Black Sky
.
When people use the term social internet, what they typically mean
are billion user social media platforms.
But I don't think that's what the social internet is
or what it can be.
And I think app protocol gives us the chance to imagine beyond
that.
Okay, sorry.
So, Ursula M.
Franklin is a Canadian scientist who, in 1989, gave a
series of lectures titled The Real World of Technology.
In it, she talks about how technology is not just the
technological artifact that we put out into the world, but also
how it affects the world, which in turn affects new technologies
.
This is kind of like the feedback loop that Rudy from Black
Sky was talking about yesterday in his talk.
So, Ursula says, "As I see it,
technology has built the house in which we all live.
The house is continually being extended and remodeled.
More and more of human life takes place within its walls,
so that today there is hardly any human activity that does not
occur within this house.
We all are affected by the design of the house, the
division of its space, and the location of its doors and
walls." That was written in 1989, but I think it
's clear where I'm going with this metaphor.
The internet is the house we live in.
We are all affected by the, hopefully it's playing,
the division of its space, the location of its doors and
walls, and how it is continually remodeled.
And I think that's why the artist Spencer Chang's work
resonates with a lot of people because it makes the movement through
this internet house visible when it is so often invisible or goes
completely unnoticed by us.
So if that is the case, if the internet is now
the house we all live in, then what is the role
of technologists?
The way I see it, we build not only the house
, but we also dictate how the house gets built, and
by whom, through things like standards and protocols.
And the decisions we make not only affect the internet itself,
but also reshape our physical reality, as in the case
of airspace, a term that's also coined by our
friend Kyle Cheka, to refer to how the platform Instagram
caused cafes and restaurants to all merge into a homogenous aesthetic
.
Okay, so there's this thing I say, which is
I want to make app protocol the default way to build on
the web.
And when I say that, I don't necessarily mean app
protocol of today.
I mean whatever future iteration of app protocol it is that actually
enables this to be the case.
And many of you in this room might be agreeing with me
, but the question we should really be asking
is why.
What real world conditions am I trying to create by making this
statement, or rather, what is the house that I'm
trying to build?
And these are questions that we must answer.
So Lawrence Hoff, who I think is here, wrote in
a recent essay that in the older protocols of the web,
the silence about purpose was a politics of non-interference
.
And this led to governance being controlled by whichever actor had the
most resources.
So I think it's great that as an ecosystem we are
already asking some of these hard questions.
Yeah, so I was trying to find the article by Lang
don Winner, do artifacts have politics?
And I just thought this was funny.
It's 2026.
We know that artifacts do have politics, and not just because
the AI overview is telling us.
Rather than shy away from dealing with the realities of our jobs
, I think we should get really clear on what we are
trying to build and why.
On the power dynamics encoded in what we build, and
on the types of conditions that those give rise to.
Okay, so in this talk, I'm going to pitch
a possible vision for the internet.
Ruha Benjamin in her recent book said, "Those who
monopolize resources also monopolize imagination." So I think it
's important for us to recognize that the current internet constrains
what we imagine and collectively resist that in order to imagine alternative
futures.
So in my internet, we are not followed wherever we
go.
Platform dynamics make tracking possible because the two computers must use an
intermediary server.
Hence the whole field of peer-to-peer.
We can be highly contextual in our interactions.
For example, I might not use Slack for both my workplace
messaging app and my organizing work and talking with friends the way
I do today in a flattened context.
The things we do are also human-sized and human shapes
.
So here, I'm thinking a lot about Aaron Kass
ane's idea of oversaturation and how the bodily experience
or affect of using the social internet today is not really conduc
ive to a living human being.
Oh, let's get the slide.
And these conditions that I described are radically different than what we
experience today.
So we don't know what it feels like to have that
internet or to live in that internet house.
And I think changing those conditions is what fundamentally gets us past
skeuomorphism.
So we can't just throw new products into being that are
non-skeuomorphic without first changing the conditions
that cause people to actually make them useful and needed in the
first place.
So that's kind of like the hard
part is the direction setting
.
And that's why the older protocol has had a politics of
non-interference because it's hard to do this.
It's easier to step back and say this is just a
protocol.
But once we do that, we can articulate what we need
to build and therefore what the protocol needs to provide.
So the internet of my dreams can only exist if there is
no data hoarding by default.
So like the easiest way to build on the web is privacy
preserving.
This is not the case today.
In order to serve a social experience, you need to store
user data.
I believe the types of software and user experiences that are delivered
on the social internet today are limited because it's software engineers
and tech companies building them.
When people talk about web 1.
0 and what feels like to me the glory era of the
internet, they talk about how what drew people to the web
was the fact that so many different types of people, technical
and non-technical, were creating websites.
I think we need to do the same thing for web 2
.
0.
And then reflecting on the idea of what it means for the
web to be human shaped, I think a big part of
what is missing on the internet is this idea of communities or
groups as a first principle rather than using platforms to then build
relationships or communities on top.
Okay, so what does this mean for the protocol?
I think an iteration of the protocol that enables this should support
privacy by design and default.
should be usable
, maintainable, extendable beyond protocol people and should be
flexible enough to support group self-management.
So I really believe in this idea of leveling up people rather
than dumbing down technology.
Okay, so all of this stuff is what I think about
every day, what my collaborators and I at Habitat think
about every day.
And it's funny because even though I think about it,
writing this talk really clarified to me what Habitat's mission
is as reimagining the social internet.
Okay, so
at Habitat, we are trying to lower the barrier of
who can build on the social internet.
Sorry, I can never find that.
One, no.
In the traditional web, people who build platforms create the social
internet.
App Proto changes this with PDS's, custom feeds
, and other levers to tweak experiences on platforms.
But to build a new type of social experience or modality
, often times you still need to build an app view.
Habitat wants to see if we can go even further.
What kinds of protocol level or shared infrastructure do we need to
make it as easy to build a social experience as it is
to build a website?
We believe building the social internet should not require sacrificing user privacy
.
So one step we are taking in this direction is trying to
give users agency over this data.
So in Habitat, you can see and say who as
people or both apps have access to parts of your data,
and we are trying to give people a way to search over
all their data in one place.
Which is something you should be able to do today on the
web but is pretty much impossible.
Okay, and then third, we are thinking about this community
piece.
So, I quit my job at Figma a month ago
to work full time on Habitat.
And one thing I think about is how at Figma,
the tools I primarily used were Slack, Google Suite, and
Zoom.
I'm a part of this wonderful organization called Collective Action
School, and it's an experimental school for tech workers to
reshape the industry from inside of it.
So there, the primary tools we used to communicate are also
Slack, Google Suite, and Zoom.
And when building Habitat, the easiest tools to reach for
were also Slack, Google Suite, and Zoom.
So when I think about data agency and self-determination
for groups, but specifically Collective Action School as a community
, my goal and what we're really trying to build at
Habitat is that communities can create their own spaces for their
own context, rather than have to use a particular platform for
a particular tool or use case.
So I imagine possibly building something like this for Collective Action
School, where we have our public-facing website, but
when you log in, there's a space that's members
only.
And it doesn't look like any other chat or syllabus or
schedule like any other space on the internet, because it's
made specifically for Collective Action School.
Okay, cool.
I wouldn't be a good CEO without a little shameless plug
.
So we do have a version of permission data that actually looks
quite similar to what the Blue Sky team put out, I
think, and will be forwards compatible with what they do.
So if you have use cases for permission data, we'd
love to chat.
And we've been building out products on top of our permission
data and other tools and services to show what you can do
with Habitat.
Our first toy app is Docs, if people want to
play around with that.
But we're also building out a control plane to actually see
what it looks like for users to have agency and transparency into
their data.
Thanks.
Okay, but back to the title of the talk.
In ecology, rewilding is a process where humans
do an initial intervention in a given place or land in order
to restore the ecosystem.
And the hope is that these seeds of intervention will seed natural
processes and increase biodiversity.
So I think in a lot of ways that our work as
developers in and of this protocol is to make these little seeds
of intervention on the web in order to enable others to use
and build on the web as a sort of natural and organic
process on its own.
So I care about all of these things, but I really
care about the second point that builders on a protocol and on
the web for social experiences shouldn't just be software engineers and
companies.
This idea of biodiversity or diversity in general comes up not just
in ecology but across disciplines.
In the dawn of everything, David Graber and David Wen
grau reconsider the narrative of human history.
So this history is usually discussed as a straight line from hunter
-gatherer society to agricultural revolution to industrial revolution to
now.
The Davids challenge this notion and point out how during the
long time where humans were thought to be hunter-gather
ers, there's not too much evidence of what they were
doing, so it's easy to spin a bunch of narratives
on top of that.
But if you do look at the evidence, there seems to
be a plurality of societal forms.
So there are hunter-gatherer societies, but also
nomadic farmers or chiefdoms or different combinations of this
depending on seasonality.
So they say, maybe the real question is, how did
we get stuck?
How did we end up in one single mode?
Wendell Berry is another one of my favorite writers and
a lifelong farmer.
And he talks about the importance of diversity to farming, both
at a local level where a diversity of crops is needed to
sustain soil, but also at a global level where each farm
being in harmony with the land lends to a diversity of
ways of doing farming, as opposed to a cash crop or
industrialized farming that treats all land as the same and therefore
depletes it.
And in this essay, Maria and Robin, who I think
is here today, write that ecologists know that diversity is
resilient.
I think this concept goes beyond ecology.
I think this is true of the internet as well.
An internet where one data center going down means the web goes
down is not resilient, and where one platform insidifying
means everyone's experiences are insidified is not resilient.
So I think the key for app protocol to survive as a
protocol and ecosystem is for us to be resilient by supporting the
necessary diversity of infrastructures, technologies, social networks, and
communities that human life demands.
Right now, this lack of diversity online is a really strongly
felt experience.
In the physical world, your library doesn't look or feel
like your kitchen, your bedroom, your school, your patio
, etc.
But online, this is absolutely the case.
My hope is that with app protocol, we can shape our
digital habitats with as much agency as we can our physical ones
.
So in the real world of technology, Ursula M.
Franklin talks about how hard it is to define technology as a
concept.
However, one definition we might be able to agree upon is
technology as a way of doing something.
So, if the current state of the web is just one
way of doing the social internet, then let's build the
social internet differently.
Thank you.
Let's give a round of applause.